Eck 3.4.0 release (#5838)
elastic/docs-content: deploy-manage/security/k8s-es-client-certificate-auth.md

Reviewer: we need to introduce this concept here:

https://docs-v3-preview.elastic.dev/elastic/docs-content/pull/5838/deploy-manage/security/eck-tls

Author: mTLS is part of the HTTP configuration thus I extended a bit the eck-http.md snippet to introduce it in 442db7926d822c5218df366a641e4c49a732b7d8

---
navigation_title: Client certificate authentication
applies_to:
  deployment:
    eck: ga 3.4
products:
  - id: cloud-kubernetes
---

# Elasticsearch client certificate authentication on ECK [k8s-es-client-certificate-auth]

> With ECK `3.4.0` and later, ECK supports configuring {{es}} to require client certificates for HTTP authentication, enabling mutual TLS (mTLS) between clients and {{es}}. When enabled, clients must present a valid certificate signed by a trusted CA to communicate with {{es}}.

Reviewer: I think we need to be more clear that kibana is the only client that's supported, and explain what happens to other clients when it's enabled

```suggestion
You can configure {{es}} to require client certificates for HTTP authentication, enabling mutual TLS (mTLS) between clients and {{es}}. When enabled, clients must present a valid certificate signed by a trusted CA to communicate with {{es}}. 

Currently, the only supported client is {{kib}}. When client certificate authentication is enabled, [behavior for other components]
```

Author: changed in 442db7926d822c5218df366a641e4c49a732b7d8

:::{note}
This requires a valid Enterprise license or Enterprise trial license. Check [the license documentation](/deploy-manage/license/manage-your-license-in-eck.md) for more details about managing licenses.
:::

:::{note}
Currently, {{es}} and {{kib}} support this feature. Support for additional components that connect to {{es}} ({{beats}}, {{agent}}, {{apm-server}}, {{ls}}, and so on) are planned to follow in future releases.

> :::

Reviewer: we avoid talking about roadmap in docs. suggest removing this in favor of saying kibana is the only supported client above.

Author: removed in 442db7926d822c5218df366a641e4c49a732b7d8

## Enable client certificate authentication [k8s-enable-client-cert-auth]

To enable client certificate authentication on {{es}}, set `spec.http.tls.client.authentication` to `true`:

```yaml subs=true
apiVersion: elasticsearch.k8s.elastic.co/v1
kind: Elasticsearch
metadata:
  name: quickstart
spec:
  version: {{version.stack}}
  nodeSets:
  - name: default
    count: 3
  http:
    tls:
      client:
        authentication: true
```

> When client authentication is enabled, ECK automatically:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When client authentication is enabled, ECK does the following:
```

Author: changed in 442db7926d822c5218df366a641e4c49a732b7d8

* Sets `xpack.security.http.ssl.client_authentication: required` in the {{es}} configuration.

> * Generates and manages a client certificate for the ECK operator so it can continue communicating with {{es}}.

Reviewer: consider

```suggestion
* Generates and manages a client certificate for the ECK operator so it can continue communicating with {{es}}.
* Generates a client certificate for {{kib}} and configures it to present that certificate when connecting to {{es}}.
```

Author: changed in 442db7926d822c5218df366a641e4c49a732b7d8

> * Aggregates client certificates from Kubernetes secrets labeled with `eck.k8s.elastic.co/client-certificate: true` (along with the corresponding {{es}} cluster soft-owner labels) into a trust bundle mounted into {{es}} pods.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Aggregates client certificates from Kubernetes secrets labeled with `eck.k8s.elastic.co/client-certificate: true` into a trust bundle mounted into {{es}} pods. The corresponding {{es}} cluster soft-owner labels are also included in this bundle.
```

Author: changed in 442db7926d822c5218df366a641e4c49a732b7d8

## Kibana with client certificate authentication [k8s-kibana-client-cert-auth]

When {{es}} requires client authentication, ECK automatically generates a client certificate for {{kib}} and configures it to present that certificate when connecting to {{es}}. No additional configuration is needed:

```yaml subs=true
apiVersion: kibana.k8s.elastic.co/v1
kind: Kibana
metadata:
  name: quickstart
spec:
  version: {{version.stack}}
  count: 1
  elasticsearchRef:
    name: quickstart
```

> ### Using a custom client certificate for Kibana [k8s-kibana-custom-client-cert]

Reviewer: I think this snippet can be skipped because it doesn't teach anyone anything. we can also reposition this section as "use your own client cert"

```suggestion
## Use a custom client certificate for Kibana [k8s-kibana-custom-client-cert]

When {{es}} requires client authentication, ECK automatically generates a client certificate for {{kib}} and configures it to present that certificate when connecting to {{es}}. No additional configuration is needed.
```

Author: changed in 442db7926d822c5218df366a641e4c49a732b7d8

To use your own client certificate instead of the one generated by ECK, reference a Kubernetes secret containing the certificate and key in the `elasticsearchRef`:

```yaml subs=true
apiVersion: kibana.k8s.elastic.co/v1
kind: Kibana
metadata:
  name: quickstart
spec:
  version: {{version.stack}}
  count: 1
  elasticsearchRef:
    name: quickstart
    clientCertificateSecretName: my-custom-client-cert
```

The referenced secret must contain `tls.crt` and `tls.key` entries:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Secret
metadata:
  name: my-custom-client-cert
type: kubernetes.io/tls
data:
  tls.crt: <base64-encoded certificate>
  tls.key: <base64-encoded private key>
```

:::{note}
The `clientCertificateSecretName` field can only be used with a named `elasticsearchRef` (not with `secretName`).
:::

> ## Disabling client certificate authentication [k8s-disable-client-cert-auth]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Disable client certificate authentication [k8s-disable-client-cert-auth]
```

Author: changed in 442db7926d822c5218df366a641e4c49a732b7d8
